Shivrav Sharma | 2023 | Theology | 2nd place
Q: If you cannot persuade your intelligent, sympathetic friends to embrace your religious belief system, do you have enough reason to believe what you believe?

In the Sanskrit epic, the Mahabharata, the archer prince Arjuna has a religious revelation in the midst of a war. On day thirteen of the fighting, Lord Krishna reveals himself to Arjuna, showing his Visvarupa, an entity composed of all creatures in the universe, with innumerable eyes and mouths, advising his aggrieved friend about Dharma (or righteousness). Arjuna has witnessed the divine. No one else on the battlefield was privy to the episode. The prince is unable to justify or explain it to anyone, as he was the sole observer. Arjuna continues to fight for the remaining five days, using the teachings imparted by Lord Krishna. The prince believes what happened, even if others do not.

But should he? If those who doubt him are intelligent and sympathetic, is this not reason for Arjuna to doubt himself? Why should he give his own judgement more weight than people who are just as intelligent as he is?

If those who doubted Arjuna were truly his epistemic peers, then he would indeed have reason to doubt himself. But, as I will argue in this essay, they were not his epistemic peers because they had not had his experiences. More generally, in matters of religious belief, those who disagree are almost never epistemic peers. So the disagreement of their intelligent and sympathetic friends does not show them to be unreasonable in their religious beliefs.

An epistemic peer can be defined as follows: "Let us say that two individuals are epistemic peers with respect to some question if and only if they satisfy the following two conditions: (i) they are equals with respect to their familiarity with the evidence and arguments which bear on that question, and (ii) they are equals with respect to general epistemic virtues such as intelligence, thoughtfulness and freedom from bias" (Kelly, pp. 174-175). In other words, epistemic peers are likely to be equally good at evaluating the claim concerned.

Imagine that two students are calculating the average score of the class. As they finish, one answers, "The average is 40, Ma'am." "No Ma'am, it is 50," the other interjects. Both know that each is good at mathematics and that they have a track record of scoring the same in tests. Yet they disagree about the average score. Many epistemologists would suggest that in these circumstances the classmates should suspend their judgement, that both of them should be "epistemically humble". As human reasoning and perceptions are susceptible to error, philosopher David Christensen argues that disagreement with an epistemic peer is an indication that our beliefs may be mistaken and that an individual in this situation should be open to revision (Christensen, pp. 193-194). Philosopher Richard Feldman concludes that one cannot have reasonable religious disagreements: if the disagreeing individuals are epistemic peers, only one of them can be reasonable (Feldman, pp. 201-208).

But this does not show religious beliefs or religious disagreement to generally be unreasonable because the disputants are rarely epistemic peers. Even if two people hypothetically share all their evidence, different intuitions can lead to different interpretations. Background beliefs guide an individual in evaluating any experience or evidence. People attesting to different faiths, such as Islam or Hinduism, would analyse a given situation differently based on their background beliefs, even if they make an honest attempt to set aside bias and to communicate their consciously held beliefs to one another. Religious interpretation and comprehension of their faith acquired from a young age has a powerful influence on people's thought process. Often, people are not even consciously aware of such instilled beliefs. This fact highlights the importance of considering the limited degree to which evidence can truly be shared, raising questions about the existence of epistemic peers. People can seldom be epistemic peers in a religious disagreement (King, pp. 249-272). Since one's intelligent, sympathetic friends are unlikely to be epistemic peers, it is not unreasonable to believe something they do not.

Regardless of the religious beliefs of our intelligent, sympathetic friends, the question still remains whether we have enough reason to continue believing what we believe. One of the major foundations for belief in specific religious traditions are the accounts of saints and prophets who have had revelatory religious experiences (experiences involving revelation of the divine or of the nature of reality). Almost all religions of the world are substantiated by the narrative of revelatory religious experiences. Debates are often focused on the subjective impressions of individuals and their interpretations, from Arjuna beholding Lord Krishna's Visvarupa to Mary Magdalene witnessing the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Gutting argues that one cannot have complete confidence in one's own beliefs, but should rather maintain "interim beliefs" in one's religious tradition. Interim beliefs are beliefs which are held provisionally, requiring further investigation. The experiences of prophets and saints provide a credible basis for religious belief, and the fact that one's intelligent friends do not share these experiences does not undermine the rationality of one's belief. The very nature of revelatory experience—subjective, transformative, and incommunicable—means that the non-experiencer cannot be an epistemic peer with respect to the experiencer's knowledge claim. Consequently, failing to persuade one's intelligent, sympathetic friends does not indicate that one lacks sufficient reason for one's religious beliefs.
